Structural Identifiability Extension (#709)
SciML/Catalyst.jl: docs/src/inverse_problems/structural_identifiability.md

Identifiability can be divided into *structural* and *practical* identifiability[^1]. Structural identifiability considers only the mathematical model, and which parameters are and are not inherently identifiable due to model structure. Practical identifiability also considers the available data, and determines what system quantities can be inferred from it. In the idealised case of an infinite amount of non-noisy data, practical identifiability converges to structural identifiability. Generally, structural identifiability is assessed before parameters are fitted, while practical identifiability is assessed afterwards.

Structural identifiability (which is what this tutorial considers) can be illustrated by the following differential equation:
${dx \over dt} = p1*p2*x(t)$
where, however much data is collected on $x$, it is impossible to determine the distinct values of $p1$ and $p2$. Hence, these parameters are these are non-identifiable (however, their product, $p1*p2$, *is* identifiable).

> Catalyst contains a special extension for carrying out structural identifiability analysis using the [StructuralIdentifiability.jl](https://github.com/SciML/StructuralIdentifiability.jl) package. This enables StructuralIdentifiability's `assess_identifiability`, `assess_local_identifiability`, and `find_identifiable_functions` functions to be called directly on Catalyst `ReactionSystem`s. It also implements specialised routines to make these more efficient when applied to reaction network models. How to use these functions is described in the following tutorial, with [StructuralIdentifiability providing a more extensive documentation](https://docs.sciml.ai/StructuralIdentifiability/stable/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Catalyst contains a special extension for carrying out structural identifiability analysis of generated reaction rate equation ODE models using the [StructuralIdentifiability.jl](https://github.com/SciML/StructuralIdentifiability.jl) package. This enables StructuralIdentifiability's `assess_identifiability`, `assess_local_identifiability`, and `find_identifiable_functions` functions to be called directly on Catalyst `ReactionSystem`s. This bypasses the need for users to convert `ReactionSystem`s to `ODESystem`s, provides a cleaner interface for calculating identifiability of reaction rate equation models, and implements specialised routines to speed up the identifiability calculations for the generated ODE models. How to use these functions is described in the following tutorial, with [StructuralIdentifiability providing a more extensive documentation](https://docs.sciml.ai/StructuralIdentifiability/stable/). 
```

> Structural identifiability can be divided into *local* and *global* identifiability. If a model quantity is locally identifiable, it means that its true value can be determined down to a finite-number of possible options. This also means that there is some limited region around the quantity's true value where this true value is the only possible value (and hence, within this region, the quantity is fully identifiable). Globally identifiable quantities' values, on the other hand, can be uniquely determined. Again, while identifiability can be confirmed structurally for a model, it does not necessarily mean that they are practically identifiable for some given data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Structural identifiability can be divided into *local* and *global* identifiability. If a model quantity is locally identifiable, it means that its true value can be determined down to a finite-number of possible options. This also means that there is some limited region around the quantity's true value where this true value is the only possible value (and hence, within this region, the quantity is fully identifiable). Globally identifiable quantities' values, on the other hand, can be uniquely determined. Again, while identifiability can be confirmed structurally for a quantity, it does not necessarily mean that it is practically identifiable for some given data.
```

> Structural identifiability can be divided into *local* and *global* identifiability. If a model quantity is locally identifiable, it means that its true value can be determined down to a finite-number of possible options. This also means that there is some limited region around its true value, where the true value is the only possible value. Globally identifiable quantities' values, on the other hand, can be uniquely determined. Again, while identifiability can be confirmed structurally for a model, it does not necessarily mean that they are practically identifiable for some given data.

Author: New version

"Structural identifiability can be divided into *local* and *global* identifiability. If a model quantity is locally identifiable, it means that its true value can be determined down to a finite-number of possible options. This also means that there is some limited region around the quantity's true value where this true value is the only possible value (and hence, within this region, the quantity is fully identifiable)."

Generally, there are three types of quantities for which identifiability can be assessed.
- Parameters (e.g. $p1$ and $p2$).
- Full variable trajectories (e.g. $x(t)$).
- Variable initial conditions (e.g. $x(0)$). 

StructuralIdentifiability currently assesses identifiability for the first two only (however, if $x(t)$ is identifiable, then $x(0)$ will be as well).

## Global identifiability analysis

### Basic example

> Local identifiability can be assessed using the `assess_identifiability` function. For each model quantity (parameters and variables), it will assess whether they are:

Reviewer: I'm confused here. Do you mean "Global identifiability can be assessed"?

Author: yes, fixed

- Globally identifiable.
- Locally identifiable.
- Unidentifiable.
  
To it, we provide our `ReactionSystem` model and a list of quantities that we are able to measure. Here, we consider a Goodwind oscillator (a simple 3-component model, where the three species $M$, $E$, and $P$ are produced and degraded, which may exhibit oscillations)[^2]. Let us say that we are able to measure the concentration of $M$, we then designate this using the `measured_quantities` argument. We can now assess identifiability in the following way:
```example si1
using Catalyst, Logging, StructuralIdentifiability
goodwind_oscillator = @reaction_network begin
    (pₘ/(1+P), dₘ), 0 <--> M
    (pₑ*M,dₑ), 0 <--> E
    (pₚ*E,dₚ), 0 <--> P
end
assess_identifiability(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M], loglevel=Logging.Error)
```

> From the output, we find that `E(t)`, `pₑ`, and `pₚ` (the trajectory of $E$, and the production rates of $E$ and $P$, respectively) are non-identifiable. Next, `dₑ` and `dₚ` (the degradation rates of $E$ and $P$, respectively) are locally identifiable. Finally, `P(t)`, `M(t)`, `pₘ`, and `dₘ` (the trajectories of `P` and `M`, and the production and degradation rate of `M`, respectively) are all globally identifiable. We note that we also imported the Logging.jl package, and provided the `loglevel=Logging.Error` input argument. StructuralIdentifiability functions generally provide a large number of output messages. Hence, we will use this argument (which requires the Logging package) throughout this tutorial to decrease the amount of printed text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the output, in the associated reaction rate equation ODE model we find that `E(t)`, `pₑ`, and `pₚ` (the trajectory of $E$, and the production rates of $E$ and $P$, respectively) are non-identifiable. Next, `dₑ` and `dₚ` (the degradation rates of $E$ and $P$, respectively) are locally identifiable. Finally, `P(t)`, `M(t)`, `pₘ`, and `dₘ` (the trajectories of `P` and `M`, and the production and degradation rate of `M`, respectively) are all globally identifiable. We note that we also imported the Logging.jl package, and provided the `loglevel=Logging.Error` input argument. StructuralIdentifiability functions generally provide a large number of output messages. Hence, we will use this argument (which requires the Logging package) throughout this tutorial to decrease the amount of printed text.
```

Next, we can assess identifiability in the case where we can measure all three species concentrations:
```example si1
assess_identifiability(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M, :P, :E], loglevel=Logging.Error)
```
in which case all initial conditions and parameters become identifiable.

### Indicating known parameters

> In the previous case we assumed that all parameters are unknown, however, this is not necessarily true. If there are parameters which value's are known, we can supply these using the `known_p` argument. Indeed, this might turn other, previously unidentifiable, parameters identifiable. Let us consider the previous example, where we measure the concentration of $M$ only, but also happen to know the production rate of $E$ ($pₑ$):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous case we assumed that all parameters are unknown, however, this is not necessarily true. If there are parameters with known values, we can supply these using the `known_p` argument. Providing this additional information might also make other, previously unidentifiable, parameters identifiable. Let us consider the previous example, where we measure the concentration of $M$ only, but now assume we also know the production rate of $E$ ($pₑ$):
```

```example si1
assess_identifiability(gwo; measured_quantities=[:M], known_p=[:pₑ], loglevel=Logging.Error)
```

> Not only does this turn the previously non-identifiable `pₑ` (globally) identifiable (which is obvious, given that its value is now known), but this additional information improve identifiability for several other network components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only does this turn the previously non-identifiable `pₑ` (globally) identifiable (which is obvious, given that its value is now known), but this additional information allows identifiability for several other network components.
```

Author: Since we might go from:

unidentifiable -> locally identifiable
unidentifiable -> globally identifiable
locally identifiable -> globally identifiable

and it is actually somewhat nuanced (and not just identifiable or not), still sure "allows" is correct?
(I'm happy to have it, just checking whether you accounted for this)

Author: The code prints the identifiability for all components, so the reader can compare to the previous case (where `pₑ` is not known) and see how things changes. Do you think this is enough to make things make sense?

To, in a similar manner, indicate that certain initial conditions are known is a work in progress. Hopefully the feature should be an available in the near future.

### Providing non-trivial measured quantities

> Sometimes, we are not actually measuring species species, but rather some combinations of species (or possibly parameters). Here, any algebraic expression can be used in `measured_quantities`. If so, used species and parameters have to first be `@unpack`'ed from the model. Say that we have a model where an enzyme ($E$) is converted between an active and inactive form, which in turns activates the production of a product, $P$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, we are not actually measuring species, but rather combinations of species (or possibly parameters), which can be captured by `measured_quantities`, which allows any algebraic expression to be provided. Species and parameters have to first be `@unpack`'ed from the model to be used in such expressions. Say that we have a model where an enzyme ($E$) is converted between an active and inactive form, which in turns activates the production of a product, $P$:
```
Why do species and parameters have to be `@unpack`'ed? You can't do `sys.symbol`?

Author: Think I preferred the old start ratehr than "ometimes, we are not actually measuring species, but rather combinations of species (or possibly parameters), which can be captured by `measured_quantities`, which allows any algebraic expression to be provided". changing the other locally and pushing.

Reviewer: Feel free to reword from the old version or my version, but please fix that the old version could be read as two completely independent, disconnected sentences as originally written.

> Sometimes, we are not actually measuring species species, but rather some combinations of species (or possibly parameters). To account for this, `measured_quantities` accepts any algebraic expressions (and not just single species). To form such expressions, species and parameters have to first be `@unpack`'ed from the model. Say that we have a model where an enzyme ($E$) is converted between an active and inactive form, which in turns activates the production of a product, $P$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, ones may not have measurements of species, but rather some combinations of species (or possibly parameters). To account for this, `measured_quantities` accepts any algebraic expression (and not just single species). To form such expressions, species and parameters have to first be `@unpack`'ed from the model. Say that we have a model where an enzyme ($E$) is converted between an active and inactive form, which in turns activates the production of a product, $P$:
```
Do then need to be unpacked or can one do `sys.A` and such to access them? It might be easier to just suggest the latter if it works.

```example si2
using Catalyst, StructuralIdentifiability # hide
enzyme_activation = @reaction_network begin
    (kA,kD), Eᵢ <--> Eₐ
    (Eₐ, d), 0 <-->P
end
```

> and we can measure the total amount of $E$ ($=$Eᵢ+Eₐ$), as well as the amount of $P$, we can use the following to assess identifiability:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and we can measure the total amount of $E$ ($=Eᵢ+Eₐ$), as well as the amount of $P$, we can use the following to assess identifiability:
```

> and we can measure the total amount of $E$ ($=Eᵢ+Eₐ$), as well as the amount of $P$, we can use the following to assess identifiability:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we can measure the total amount of $E$ ($=Eᵢ+Eₐ$), as well as the amount of $P$, we can use the following to assess identifiability:
```

```example si2
@unpack Eᵢ, Eₐ = enzyme_activation
assess_identifiability(enzyme_activation; measured_quantities=[Eᵢ+Eₐ, :P], loglevel=Logging.Error)
nothing # hide
```

### Assessing identifiability for specified quantities only
By default, StructuralIdentifiability assesses identifiability for all parameters and variables. It is, however, possible to designate precisely which quantities you want to check using the `funcs_to_check` option. This both includes selecting a smaller subset of parameters and variables to check, or defining customised expressions. Let us consider the Goodwind from previously, and say that we would like to check whether the production parameters ($pₘ$, $pₑ$, and $pₚ$) and the total amount of the three species ($P + M + E$) are identifiable quantities. Here, we would first unpack these (allowing us to form algebraic expressions) and then use the following code:
```example si1
@unpack pₘ, pₑ, pₚ, M, E, P = goodwind_oscillator

> assess_identifiability(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M], funcs_to_check=[pₘ, pₑ, pₚ, M + E + P], loglevel=Logging.Error)

Reviewer: Perhaps `quantities_to_identify` or `quants_to_ident` would be clearer for users / more descriptive than `funcs_to_check`?

Author: Agreed, but again, this is what they sue in StructuralIdentifiability. I can use something else (like for `p`), but figured it would make sense to use what they use.

nothing # hide
```

### Probability of correctness
The identifiability methods used can, in theory, produce erroneous results. However, it is possible to adjust the lower bound for the probability of correctness using the argument `p` (by default set to `0.99`, that is, at least a $99\%$ chance of correctness). We can e.g. increase the bound through:
```example si2

> assess_identifiability(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M], p=0.999, loglevel=Logging.Error)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
assess_identifiability(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M], p=0.999, loglevel=Logging.Error)
```
Do we have to use `p`? This seems confusing given it usually means parameters in SciML. Maybe use `identifiability_probability` or `ident_prob`?

Reviewer: It might be worth an issue there. I think they should consider deprecating that and adding a more descriptive keyword. Can't the `p` keyword be used to pass parameters in SciML problems even? If so it probably shouldn't be used in SI if they are moving to be more SciML compatible.

Reviewer 2: We do use `p` but if you decide to use a more descriptive name, this sounds good to me. Normally, there is much need in changing this parameter anyway.

Reviewer: OK, maybe @TorkelE we can add a more descriptive keyword here and translate it to `p` for them internally, and then once SI gets updated with that keyword we can just switch to passing it through?

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should name it `pvalue`.

Reviewer 3: I think in stats everyone calls it a `pvalue` though.

Reviewer 3: well I guess it's not quite a pvalue? It's more of a `prob_threshold`?

Reviewer: Yeah, I realized that was what you meant by `pvalue` right after I suggested `probvalue`. I think it is probably ok then.

Reviewer: I personally like `prob_threshold` better.

Author: I will do prob_threshold . People won't really use it anyway, so a long keyword is not a problem.

nothing # hide
```
giving a minimum bound of $99.9\%$ chance of correctness. In practise, the bounds used by StructuralIdentifiability are very conservative, which means that while the minimum guaranteed probability of correctness in the default case is $99\%$, in practise it is much higher. While increasing the value of `p` increases the certainty of correctness, it will also increase the time required to assess identifiability.

## Local identifiability analysis

> Local identifiability can be assessed through the `assess_local_identifiability` function. While this is already determined by `assess_identifiability`, assessing local identifiability only have the advantage that it is easier to compute. Hence, there might be models where global identifiability analysis fails (or takes prohibitively long time), where instead `assess_local_identifiability` can be used. This functions takes the same inputs as `assess_identifiability` and returns, for each quantity, `true` if it is locally identifiable (or `false` if it is not). Here, for the Goodwind oscillator, we assesses it for local identifiability only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Local identifiability can be assessed through the `assess_local_identifiability` function. While this is already determined by `assess_identifiability`, assessing local identifiability only has the advantage that it is easier to compute. Hence, there might be models where global identifiability analysis fails (or takes a prohibitively long time), where instead `assess_local_identifiability` can be used. This function takes the same inputs as `assess_identifiability` and returns, for each quantity, `true` if it is locally identifiable (or `false` if it is not). Here, for the Goodwind oscillator, we assesses it for local identifiability only:
```

```example si1
assess_local_identifiability(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M], loglevel=Logging.Error)
```
We note that the results are consistent with those produced by `assess_identifiability` (with globally or locally identifiable quantities here all being assessed as at least locally identifiable).

## Finding identifiable functions

> Finally, StructuralIdentifiability provides the `find_identifiable_functions` function. Rather than determining the identifiability of each parameter and initial condition of the model, it finds a minimal set of identifiable functions, such as any other identifiable expression of the model can be generated by these. Let us again consider the Goodwind oscillator, using the `find_identifiable_functions` function we find that identifiability can be reduced to five globally identifiable expressions:

Reviewer: `it finds a minimal set of identifiable functions, such as any other identifiable expression of the model can be generated by these`

I don't understand what is being said here. The last part is confusing in its wording.

Author: agreed, fixed

```example si1
find_identifiable_functions(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M], loglevel=Logging.Error)
```

> Again, these results are consistent with those produced by `assess_identifiability`. There, `pₑ` and `pₚ` where found to be globally identifiable. Here, they correspond directly to identifiable expressions. The remaining four parameters (`pₘ`, `dₘ`, `dₑ`, and `dₚ`) occurs as part of more complicated composite expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, these results are consistent with those produced by `assess_identifiability`. There, `pₑ` and `pₚ` where found to be globally identifiable. Here, they correspond directly to identifiable expressions. The remaining four parameters (`pₘ`, `dₘ`, `dₑ`, and `dₚ`) occur as part of more complicated composite expressions.
```

> The `find_identifiable_functions` functions tries to simplify its output functions to create nice expressions. The degree to which it does this can be adjusted using the `simplify` keywords. Using the `:weak`, `:standard` (default), and `:strong` arguments, increased simplification can be forced (at the expense of longer runtimes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`find_identifiable_functions` tries to simplify its output functions to create nice expressions. The degree to which it does this can be adjusted using the `simplify` keywords. Using the `:weak`, `:standard` (default), and `:strong` arguments, increased simplification can be forced (at the expense of longer runtime).
```

## Creating StructuralIdentifiability compatible ODE models from Catalyst `ReactionSystem`s

> While the functionality described above covers the vast majority of analysis that user might want to perform, the StructuralIdentifiability package supports several additional features. While these does not have inherent Catalyst support, we do provide the `make_si_ode` function to simplify their use. Similarly to the previous functions, it takes a `ReactionSystem` and lists of measured quantities and known parameter values. The output is a [ode of the standard form supported by StructuralIdentifiability](https://docs.sciml.ai/StructuralIdentifiability/stable/tutorials/creating_ode/#Defining-the-model-using-@ODEmodel-macro). It can be created using the following syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the functionality described above covers the vast majority of analysis that user might want to perform, the StructuralIdentifiability package supports several additional features. While these does not have inherent Catalyst support, we do provide the `make_si_ode` function to simplify their use. Similar to the previous functions, it takes a `ReactionSystem`, lists of measured quantities, and known parameter values. The output is a [ODE of the standard form supported by StructuralIdentifiability](https://docs.sciml.ai/StructuralIdentifiability/stable/tutorials/creating_ode/#Defining-the-model-using-@ODEmodel-macro). It can be created using the following syntax:
```

```example si1
si_ode = make_si_ode(goodwind_oscillator; measured_quantities=[:M])
nothing # hide
```

> and then used as input to various StructuralIdentifiability functions. In the following example we uses StructuralIdentifiability's `print_for_DAISY` function, printing the model as an expression that can be used by the [DAISY](https://daisy.dei.unipd.it/) software for identifiability analysis[^3].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then used as input to various StructuralIdentifiability functions. In the following example we use StructuralIdentifiability's `print_for_DAISY` function, printing the model as an expression that can be used by the [DAISY](https://daisy.dei.unipd.it/) software for identifiability analysis[^3].
```

```example si1
print_for_DAISY(si_ode)
nothing # hide
```

## Notes on systems with conservation laws
Several reaction network models, such as
```example si2
using Catalyst, Logging, StructuralIdentifiability # hide
rs = @reaction_network begin
  (k1,k2), X1 <--> X2
end
```

> contain conservation laws (in this case $Γ = X1 + X2$, where $Γ = X1(0) + X2(0)$ is a constant). Because the presence of such conservation laws makes structural identifiability analysis prohibitively computationally expensive (for all but the simplest of cases), these are automatically eliminated by Catalyst (removing one ODE from the resulting ODE system for each conservation law). For the `assess_identifiability` and `assess_local_identifiability` functions, this will be unnoticed by the user. However, for the `find_identifiable_functions` and `make_si_ode` functions, this may result in one, or several, parameters on the form `Γ[i]` (where `i` is an integer) appearing in the produced expressions. These correspond to the conservation law constants and can be found through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contain conservation laws (in this case $Γ = X1 + X2$, where $Γ = X1(0) + X2(0)$ is a constant). Because the presence of such conservation laws makes structural identifiability analysis prohibitively computationally expensive (for all but the simplest of cases), these are automatically eliminated by Catalyst (removing one ODE from the resulting ODE system for each conservation law). For the `assess_identifiability` and `assess_local_identifiability` functions, this will be unnoticed by the user. However, for the `find_identifiable_functions` and `make_si_ode` functions, this may result in one, or several, parameters of the form `Γ[i]` (where `i` is an integer) appearing in the produced expressions. These correspond to the conservation law constants and can be found through
```

```example si2
conservedequations(rs)
```
E.g. if you run:
```example si2
find_identifiable_functions(rs; measured_quantities = [:X1, :X2])
```
we see that `Γ[1]` (`= X1(0) + X2(0)`) is detected as an identifiable expression. If we want to disable this feature for any function, we can use the `remove_conserved = false` option:
```example si2
find_identifiable_functions(rs; measured_quantities = [:X1, :X2], remove_conserved = false)
```

## Systems with exponent parameters
Structural identifiability cannot currently be applied to systems with parameters (or species) in exponents. E.g. this
```julia
rn = @reaction_network begin
    (hill(X,v,K,n),d), 0 <--> X
end
assess_identifiability(rn; measured_quantities=[:X])
```

> is currently not possible. Hopefully this will be a supported feature in the future. For now, these expression will have to be rewritten to not include such exponents. For some cases, e.g. `10^k` this is trivial. However, it is also possible generally (but more involved and often includes introducing additional variables). If you have a system where this is required, it is recommended to contact an expert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is currently not possible. Hopefully this will be a supported feature in the future. For now, such expressions will have to be rewritten to not include such exponents. For some cases, e.g. `10^k` this is trivial. However, it is also possible generally (but more involved and often includes introducing additional variables). 
```
I'd just cut that last sentence. I don't think it adds anything helpful as it basically says find a generic other person to help you...
